It was 2016.

The world was still reeling from Harambe's passing and the start of Brexit. My grandmother, at home in Louisville, Kentucky, was relaxing in her patio home, watching pundits debate the merits of these developments when her phone began to ring.

Excited, she muted the television and stood up to answer the phone. She didn't recognize the number. "Still, it may be important," she thought. She answered it.

"Grandma? Are you there?" I said. "It's me, James, and I'm in trouble."

Her heart sank.

"I need your help. I was caught with marijuana and arrested."

"I'm calling you from a holding cell out west—I need you to wire $20,000 to this account for bail. This is my only call. Do you have a pen?"

I wasn't in jail, and I didn't make that call.

While I was blissfully up to no good at 22 working in Portland, Oregon, I can promise you I was never arrested. My grandmother, however, with a heart of gold, rushed to the nearby PNC branch to fight with the clerk to send $20,000.

Thankfully she decided to share this information with my mother. My mother, surprised, as marijuana was legal in Oregon, called me to ask about my newfound hobby and imprisonment. While she was relieved I wasn't in jail, she fearfully hung up and called my grandmother to talk her down from sending the money. My grandma pushed back but relented. She didn't lose the money, but she did lose some of her pride.

She had nearly been scammed. They didn't copy my voice; they didn't have much identifying information... but they took a shot in the dark and hit their target.

With over 20% of Americans projected to be over the age of 65 by 2030, the rise of remote work, and a rapidly changing media landscape, these threats are being intensified. Unfortunately, this attack was old-fashioned; the latest ones are kinds your family and your business have never dealt with before. In order to protect what's yours (and avoid embarrassing calls from PNC branches), you'll need to be aware of the current threat landscape and what you can do to protect yourself against these attacks.

### Threats

Generative AI allows us to duplicate the efforts of humanity's smartest to supercharge output. It also allows attackers to engage in brand new heights of fraud. In today's world, anything digital can be faked:

* Images
* Video
* Voice
* Calls

[Here is a lovely clip of a happy wedding](https://x.com/caleb_friesen2/status/1945470112133206505). Except it isn't—as the poster says, nothing in that was real. It was entirely generated by artificial intelligence and looks stunningly realistic. Imagine receiving video of your loved one from a prison cell for marijuana possession, or your boss telling you to send over a password—it may be fake.

What about voice, you may say? Voice is even easier to duplicate, as this [modern example of my grandmother's story shows.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=As4nS5aOVnw) Attackers can clone a target's voice via loose recordings or spam calls to fish for as little as one sentence, and then create a hyper-realistic copy of that voice to impersonate the source.

Even [Salesforce has steps to identify and mitigate](https://indeedinc.my.site.com/employerSupport1/s/article/How-to-spot-a-deepfake-during-a-video-interview?language=en_US) such "deepfake" calls in interviews now. Famously, there is widespread evidence of [North Koreans impersonating American tech workers](https://www.politico.com/news/2025/05/12/north-korea-remote-workers-us-tech-companies-00340208) to bring money into the Hermit Kingdom. If you're not convinced, [$25 million was stolen after a deepfake CEO called and tricked an employee.](https://www.cnn.com/2024/02/04/asia/deepfake-cfo-scam-hong-kong-intl-hnk)

This is not only an emergency for grandmothers.
    
### Enforcing Trust

How can you avoid getting fooled by such a huckster impersonating your family, a date, a coworker, or even your boss? There are a few quick tricks to feel safer in the modern era and double-check who you're interacting with:

* Use secret words
* Validate your video call companion is real
* Trust no video
* Avoid giving too much away

My family has the fortune of having a slightly paranoid techie as a member, and since the marijuana-jail incident, I've versed them all on the value of a secret word. If any of us call asking for money, for emergency help, or to say we've been kidnapped, we have a secret word we all expect to hear.

For example, if I get a call from my brother that he's in a Guatemalan holding cell, while I would be alarmed, unless he screams something like "Marsupial, marsupial, marsupial!" I would be wary that this may be an elaborate fake targeting me or my family. I highly recommend every family discuss ahead of time a secret word and ensure they don't tell anyone else about it.

When it comes to deepfake calls, if you are a public figure, you should absolutely be wary of being targeted in such an attack. If you hold credentials at a software company that attackers want to steal customer data from, if you are a business leader, a politician, or even a high-worth individual, the incentive and capability exist to target you in this manner. You need to be wary by ensuring that all calls/meetings are from trusted sources, and when in doubt, ask the person on the other end of the line to stand up or turn their head side to side. Look for glitches, graphical artifacts, or strange aberrations in the video stream. If you're unsure, reach out to the party using a known communication method like iMessage, Signal, WhatsApp, or a corporate communication tool like Teams or Slack. If you have any doubt whatsoever, it's simply not worth avoiding the embarrassment, and someday the other party will start to appreciate it as well.

This goes without saying, but if you can't trust live video, then any prerecorded video is just as likely to be as fake as the latest Avenger's scene. If a number that appears to be your boss's number sends you a video asking for credentials or your password, think twice. Ask questions; be critical.

The final trick is to stop giving too much of your info away. For some of us, that's simply not possible, but if you have an already low profile and you get a call from an unknown number, simply wait to say "hello." They may be trying to harvest your voice, and as little as a sentence could enable them to build a model to target your grandma or boss. If the caller is legit, they will be eager to start the conversation. If you don't hear anything, hang up and block the number.

### Conclusion

The world is changing, and we need to change with it.

If we want to survive on the business frontier, we can't leave options such as generative AI off the table, but we need to ensure we don't get consumed by them either.

Stay critical; ask questions. Keep your family and your business safe.
